International Journal of Architectural Engineering & Urban Planning Architectural
The identity of the early Qajarid architectural decoration and its sources
from the beginning to the end of Fat'h ali shah period (1785-1834)
M. Zandich¹*, A. Fahimi Far², I. Khaleghi³, F. Mohammadi Haji Abadi
Received: March 2013, Accepted: April 2014
Abstract
The Qajar dynasty came to power after the Zand rulers. During this period Persia witnessed some of its most decisive
changes, mainly originating from international developments. The rise of the Qajar dynasty brought to an end a long period of
political instability that characterized eighteenth-century Persia. The beginning of the Qajar period coincided with the French
Revolution, the drafting of the American Constitution, and the rise of industrial Europe; its end came with the Great War and
the dramatic collapse of the Imperial system that came in the war's aftermath. Such international developments brought about
a new socio-political and cultural environment. As a result, Persia was influenced by European diplomacy, frightened by its
armies, and fascinated by its culture and artistry. Resistance to the Russian and British Empires caused territorial losses,
diminishing prestige, loss of control in its domestic affairs, and the threat of disintegration. As a result of drastic socio-
political and cultural alteration during the Qajar period, art emerged with a new style and theme. Qajarid decoration however
was the first stage in the disruption of Persian architecture. It is noteworthy that religious buildings were less influenced than
the secular buildings.
In contrast with politics Qajarid mural decoration and painting has been studied by relatively few scholars, Some of these
examinations have focused on European influence on Qajar art, but in general these mainly analyse Qajar art in technique
without specific focus on the environmental factors.
Keywords: Mural arts, Painting, Architectural decorations, Qajar dynasty, Agha Muhammad Khan, Fat'H Ali shah, Qajarid
arts.
1. Introduction
The Qajar dynasty came to power after the Zand rulers.
During this period Persia witnessed some of its most
decisive changes, mainly originating from international
developments. The rise of the Qajar dynasty brought to an
end a long period of political instability that characterized
eighteenth-century Persia. During this period Persia was
influenced by European diplomacy, frightened by its armies,
and fascinated by its culture and artistry. As a result of
drastic socio-political and cultural alteration during the
Qajar period, art emerged with a new style and theme.
*Corresponding author: Mahdi_zandieh@yahoo.com
1 Assistant professor, Department of Art & Architecture, Faculty
of Architecture and Urbanism, Imam Khomeini International
University (IKIU), Qazvin, Iran
2 Assistant Professor, Department of Art & Architecture, Faculty
of Painting, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Iran
3 MSc. Department of Art & Architecture, Faculty of
Architecture and Urbanism, Imam Khomeini International
University (IKIU)
4 MSc. Department of Art & Architecture, Faculty of Art
Research, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Iran
The impact of Europe on Qajarid architecture is
identifiable more in the façade and murals rather than
internal planning and function.
Early Qajarid murals occurred in three media:-rock
relief, wall painting and painted tile. The majority of
painting during the FatH Ali Shah period is executed at
life size an important aspect in assessing the development
of early Qajarid art.
This study aims to identify the cultural and artistic of
the early Qajarid mural decoration and its sources.
Qajarid mural decoration and painting has been studied
by relatively few scholars, but these include Zoka, (1963&
1970), Diba (1989), [1], [2], [3], [4], [5], [6], [7], [8],
Sharifzadeh (1994a; 1994b)³, Najmabadi (1999) Najmabadi
1 Zoka, Y. (1963) Mirza Abul Hasan Khan-e sani al-Mulk Ghaffari,
Tehran, Hunar va Mardum, no. 10 & 11.
Zoka, Y. (1970) Tarikhche-ye sakhteman-e arg-e saltanati Tehran,
(History of the Buildings at the Arg, Tehran.
2 Diba, L. (1989) Lacquerwork, ed Ferrier, New Haven & London, Yale
University Press.),
3 Sharifzadeh, A. (1994) tathir-e qab bar naqqashi-ye Irani (The
Influence of the Western Painting on Persian Painting), Tehran, Mirath
Farhangi. Sharifzadeh, A, (1994) sukhani digar dar barehe shahname-ye
Davari, (Another interpretation of the Shahname Davari), Tehran,
Museha, No. 13 &14),
International Journal of Architectural Engineering & Urban Planning, Vol. 23, Nos. 1 & 2, June & December 2013
