3
138 پژوهش های باسنان اینزا
پژوهش های باشناسی اینزا
A
P.ISSN: 2345-5225 & E. 188N: 2345-5500
Homepage: https://abuk.basu.ac.ir/
Vol. 13, No. 38, Antuma 2023
PAZIKMESILIA YE BASTI
Physical-Cultural Typology of Sanandaj
Houses in the First Pahlavi Period (Case Study:
Ahmadzadeh, Amir Asefi and Mesri Houses)
Mona Mohammadmoradi¹, Mehrdad Usefzamani²,
Manouchehr Foroutan³
https://dx.doi.org/10.22084/NB.2023.26123.2471
Received: 2022/04/14; Accepted: 2022/10/18
Type of Article: Research
Pp: 349-376
1. PhD Student in Architecture, Department of
Architecture, Faculty of Art and Architecture,
Hamedan Branch, Islamic Azad University,
Hamadan, Iran
2. Assistant Professor of Architecture, Faculty
of Art and Architecture, University of Kurdistan,
Sanandaj, Iran (Corresponding Author)
Email: m.usefzamani@uok.ac.ir
3. Assistant Professor of Architecture, Faculty
of Art and Architecture, Hamedan Branch,
Islamic Azad University, Hamadan, Iran
Citations: Mohamad Moradi, M.; Usef-
Zamani yoroHouses in the
adeh,
Cultural Typology of Sanandaj
First Pahlavi Period (Case Study: Ahmadzadeh,
Amir Asefi and Mesri Houses)". Pazhoheshha-
ye Bastan Shenast Iran, 13(38): 349.376. DOI:
10.22084/nb.2023.26123.2471
Homepage of this Article: https://nbsh.basu.
ac.ir/article_5070.html?lang=en
PAZHOHESH-HA-YE BASTANSHENASI IRAN
Archaeological Researches of Iran
Journal of Department of Archaeology, Faculty of Art and
Architecture, Bu-Ali Sina University, Hamadan, Iran.
Publisher: Bu-Alt Sina University. All rights
reserved.
Abstract
The typology can also include micro issues on a small scale of architecture
to metropolitan issues. According to the changes that have taken place in
the last century, historical houses are severely subject to destruction, while
they constitute the major part of the fabric of the historical cities of Iran.
Investigations show that so far not many studies have been done on these
houses, thinking about them due to matching the needs of Iranian people
and the construction environment can be beneficial in reaching a suitable
housing model. The current research is a qualitative approach and in terms
of theoretical purpose. The research strategy has a historical method and
the research method is descriptive-analytical in terms of the type of results.
The main issue of this article is how the culture of the people of the region
affects the formation of the types of houses in Sanandaj during the first
Pahlavi period. Therefore, with a cultural-physiological look at the houses
of Ahmadzadeh, Amir Asefi and Mesri, the most obvious characteristic
affecting the formation of their species was extracted. The purpose of this
research is to study and understand the relationship between the architecture
of houses in Sanandaj and the culture of the Kurdistan region, to know
the architectural types of Sanandaj houses in the first Pahlavi period from
the cultural point of view of the Kurdistan region, and to analyze the
characteristics of the existing types of houses in Sanandaj based on the
reading (study and analysis) of the buildings. The results of this research
show that the percentage of open and closed spaces in the historical houses
of Sanandaj indicate the formation of the body of the houses, and also
factors such as maintaining privacy, culture and customs are among the
main indicators. And the culture of Ahmadzadeh, Amir Asefi and Mesri
houses, which shows the preservation of social-physical identity and local
Copyright©2022, The Authors. This open- culture in Sanandaj city.
access article is published under the terms of
the Creative Commons.
Keywords: Typology, Physical-Cultural, Historical Houses, Sanandaj.
K
E