Monitoring the Character of Place in the Historical Site of Sanandaj, Iran
Hooshmand Alizadeh*¹ and Kayoumars Habibi²
¹ Assistant Professor, Department of Architecture and Planning, University of Kurdistan, Iran
² Assistant Professor, Department of Architecture and Planning, University of Kurdistan, Iran

Abstract
Historical sites are special places not only due to the cultural heritage that they house, but also due to their
natural resources. Many such sites are in a danger of losing their historical character if relevant measures
are not put in place to ensure the continuity of this character. This paper is concerned with the character of
place in historical site of Sanandaj considering two main factors of physical substance and pattern of material
which were recognized as basic aspects contributing to the character of place (Kropf, 1996). The paper also
proposes the SWOT analysis as an effective framework for identifying and assessing the qualities of place to
derive an appropriate decision-making in conservation plan of historic site. The outcome of the case study is
that the historical site of Sanandaj has the potential for natural and cultural resource-management plans, but
this has not been explored as of yet.

Keywords: urban character; SWOT analysis; Sanandaj; cultural and natural heritage

1. Introduction
Historical sites are special places not only due to
the cultural heritage that they house, but also due to
their natural resources. They can be considered as
irreplaceable assets representing the investment of
centuries of knowledge and lessons which weave
the various physical elements and spatial units
together in particular contexts. For this reason,
such environments are "a treasure house of human
experience of successes and failure" (Rapoport,
1989), good examples of "problem solving a total
response to the challenge of climate and topography"
and demonstrating an adaptation of man to the ebb
and flow of social and political history of particular
nations in a long process of trial and error (Ahmad and
Malcolm, 2001). Many such sites are in a danger of
losing their historical aspects if relevant studies are not
put in place to measures those aspects and ensure the
continuity of their qualities.

As Rowley et al. (1997) state, "...conventional
planning approaches tend to be oriented toward
looking at problems based on current understanding,
or an inside-out mind set; whereas strategic planning
requires an understanding of the nature of the issue,
and then of an appropriate response, or an outside-

*Contact Author: Hooshmand Alizadeh, Assistant professor,
Department of Architecture and Planning, Faculty of Engineering,
University of Kurdistan, Sanandaj, (Kurdistan), Iran
Tel: +98-871-666-0076 Fax: +98-871-666-0073
E-mail: hoshali@yahoo.co.uk
(Received April 1, 2008; accepted July 22, 2008)
in mind set". "The underlying intension of a strategic
approach is to identity what is available in a historic
site, qualities that should be protected and enhanced;
and along with identifying these, to determine where
negative factors could be removed or mitigated and to
identify where the opportunities for enhancement lie"
(Doratli et al. 1980). In this line, the SWOT model
was recognized "the basis for virtually all formalized
strategy formulation processes", where it provides the
preliminary stage of decision making and possible
strategies for intervention (Moughtin et al. 1999,
Burton et al. 2002).

This paper is concerned with the character of place
in the historical site of Sanandaj considering two
leading questions:
1. How was the historic core of Sanandaj formed?
2. What socio-spatial qualities it contained which
gave birth to its character?
These has been dealt considering two main factors
of physical substance and pattern of material through
document analysis, observation of the built form of
the city and physical survey of existing built form and
its natural context (taking photograph and analytical
drawings). Then, the technique of SWOT analysis has
been applied as an effective framework for identifying
and assessing the qualities of place to derive an
appropriate decision-making in conservation plan of
historic site.

2. Geophysical Setting
From "the concept of place which implies an inside
and an outside character, as integral parts of existence,
it is clear that the city in itself is meaningless to be

Journal of Asian Architecture and Building Engineering/November 2008/208 201
