Arch NetR
80%
Intemational Journal of Architectural Research
Ahad Nejad Ebrahimi, Farnaz Nazarzadeh, and Elnaz Nazarzadeh
PERSIAN GARDENS IN COLD AND DRY CLIMATE:
A CASE STUDY OF TABRIZ'S HISTORICAL GARDENS
Ahad Nejad Ebrahimi, Farnaz Nazarzadeh, and Elnaz Nazarzadeh
Tabriz Islamic Art University, Tabriz, Iran
*Corresponding Author's email address: Ahadebrahimi@tabriziau.ac.ir
Abstract
Throughout history, gardens and garden designing has been in the attention of Persian
architects who had special expertise in the construction of gardens. The appearance of Islam
and allegories of paradise taken from that in Koran and Saints' sayings gave spirituality to
garden construction. Climate conditions have also had an important role in this respect but
little research has been done about it and most of the investigations have referred to spiritual
aspects and forms of garden. The cold and dry climate that has enveloped parts of West and
North West of Iran has many gardens with different forms and functions, which have not
been paid much attention to by studies done so far. The aim of this paper is to identify the
features and specifications of cold and dry climate gardens with an emphasis on Tabriz's
Gardens. Due to its natural and strategic situation, Tabriz has always been in the attention
of governments throughout history; travellers and tourists have mentioned Tabriz as a city
that has beautiful gardens. But, the earthquakes and wars have left no remains of those
beautiful gardens. This investigation, by a comparative study of the climates in Iran and the
effect of those climates on the formation of gardens and garden design, tries to identify the
features and characteristics of gardens in cold and dry climate. The method of study is
interpretive-historical on the basis of written documents and historic features and field study
of existing gardens in this climate. The results show that, with respect to natural substrate,
vegetation, the form of water supply, and the general form of the garden; gardens in dry and
cold climate are different from gardens in other climates.
Keywords: Persian garden; historical garden; dry and cold climate; Tabriz
INTRODUCTION
Iran's historic cities have several green spots as gardens since Iranians considered having a pool
and grass in residential areas as a critical issue, so they brought gardens to their homes in the
form of carpets with the pictures of gardens and trees, designing carpets that reflect the garden
landscape (Wilber, 2006). Iranians made suitable gardens tailored to their climate and natural
environment. Extensive studies of gardens in areas with hot and dry climates of Iran have led to
lower consideration of gardens of other areas and climates. Cold and dry mountainous climate
affect cities, such as Tabriz, Hamadan, and Sanandaj in the West and Northwest of Iran along
the Zagros Mountains. The main reason that gardens of these areas have been studied less is
the lack of written sources and samples remaining in the field. In this paper, by studying a
number of available gardens in cold and dry climate, their features have been recognized in
comparison to the hot and dry climate and, for the purpose of accuracy, the emphasis was on
historic gardens of Tabriz, so that, with a comparative study, the similarities and differences
between them would be found.
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
This study is a basic theoretical research that aims to identify the features of cold and dry climate
gardens. The research methodology used is interpretation-historical, which relies on historical
sources, historical documents, and texts and images in different historical periods. The data of
Archnet-IJAR, Volume 10 - Issue 3 - November 2016 (193-212) - Regular Section
193
Copyright © 2016 Archnet-IJAR, International Journal of Architectural Research